## The world in brief 2023-05-23

President Joe Biden and Kevin McCarthy, the Republican speaker of the House, failed to reach a deal to raise <strong>America’s debt ceiling</strong>, but vowed to keep talking. Both men described their hours-long meeting at the White House on Monday as “productive” and suggested an agreement was within reach. Earlier Janet Yellen, the treasury secretary, warned that [failure to raise the debt ceiling](https://www.economist.com/finance-and-economics/2023/05/22/what-happens-if-america-defaults-on-its-debt) before June 1st could trigger a debt default.

Vyacheslav Gladkov, the governor of <strong>Russia’s</strong> Belgorod region, which borders <strong>Ukraine</strong>, said that a Ukrainian “sabotage group” had entered Russian territory. In a statement Mr Gladkov said that [Russian forces](https://www.economist.com/europe/2023/05/21/russias-army-is-learning-on-the-battlefield) were taking steps to repel the attack. Mykhailo Podolyak, a senior advisor to Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelensky, said that Ukraine has “nothing to do” with the events in Belgorod.

A week-long ceasefire officially began in <strong>Sudan</strong> even as more air strikes and clashes were reported in Khartoum, the capital. Hundreds of people have been killed and more than a million have fled their homes since fighting between the army and the Rapid Support Forces, a paramilitary group, started last month. Previous [attempts at a truce](https://www.economist.com/middle-east-and-africa/2023/05/11/what-the-west-gets-wrong-about-peacemaking-in-sudan) have all failed. 

<strong>Sinan Ogan</strong>, the third-placed candidate in [Turkey’s presidential election](https://www.economist.com/europe/2023/05/14/recep-tayyip-erdogan-beats-his-challenger-as-turkey-votes), said he would back <strong>Recep Tayyip Erdogan</strong>, the incumbent, in the run-off on May 28th. Mr Erdogan received 49.5% of the votes in the first round; Mr Ogan only 5.2%. The announcement further narrows the chances that <strong>Kemal Kilicdaroglu</strong>, the main opposition candidate, can unseat Turkey’s longterm leader.

<strong>TikTok</strong> sued <strong>Montana</strong> over the state’s [ban on the social-media app](https://www.economist.com/united-states/2023/03/30/both-americas-political-camps-agree-that-tiktok-is-troubling), which it called a violation of Americans’ free-speech rights. Montana’s law, due to take effect next year, will fine app stores that enable downloads of the Chinese-owned platform. It is the first such measure in America, enacted over concerns about users’ vulnerability to data collection and propaganda.

First Citizens, the new owners of <strong>Silicon Valley Bank</strong>, sued <strong>HSBC</strong>, a British lender, and several former employees for more than $1bn. The group is accused of engineering “a scheme to plunder” senior staff and confidential information from SVB shortly after it [collapsed](https://www.economist.com/finance-and-economics/2023/03/14/what-the-loss-of-silicon-valley-bank-means-for-silicon-valley) in early March. HSBC purchased SVB’s British entity days later, shortly before First Citizens acquired SVB. 

A <strong>fake image </strong>showing an explosion near the Pentagon went viral on <strong>Twitter,</strong> triggering a brief dip in stockmarkets. The picture, which appears to have been generated by <strong>AI,</strong> was shared by several verified accounts on the social-media platform including one that falsely claimed to be associated with Bloomberg News. An account promoting the QAnon [conspiracy theory](https://www.economist.com/united-states/2020/08/29/qanon-conspiracy-theorists-could-prove-awkward-for-republicans) probably first tweeted the image.

<strong>Fact of the day: </strong>$31.8m, the record amount fetched at auction in 2020 by “Stan”, a <em>Tyrannosaurus rex</em> skeleton. [Read the full story](https://www.economist.com/science-and-technology/2023/05/17/the-market-for-dinosaur-fossils-is-booming). 

----------

## America’s debt-ceiling drama intensifies

President Joe Biden, having left the G7 summit in Japan on Sunday, had hoped to tie a bow on a debt-ceiling deal on his return to Washington. Instead, he looks likely to land squarely in the middle of high-stakes negotiations.

Republicans have been pressing for big spending cuts, and Kevin McCarthy, speaker of the House of Representatives, feels that he must secure them to keep his fractious caucus together. The Democrats, meanwhile, have been resisting them, and progressives in the party have warned that they might reject any deal perceived as a capitulation by Mr Biden’s administration.

The Treasury will use up its cash buffers as soon as June 1st, which means politicians have a fast-closing window in which to reach agreement. A [no-deal scenario](https://www.economist.com/finance-and-economics/2023/05/15/what-america-does-after-a-debt-ceiling-disaster)—which could trigger an American default, a devastating prospect for global markets—ought to be unthinkable, but anyone watching the negotiations closely is finding it harder to ignore.

## Great powers in the Pacific

The leaders of at least 14 Pacific countries convened in Papua New Guinea on Monday, for two separate meetings: one with Antony Blinken, America’s secretary of state; the other with Narendra Modi, India’s prime minister. The gatherings are a sign of the region’s growing strategic importance. 

The Pacific is, increasingly, the locus of a power struggle between America and China. China used aid and investment to[ increase its influence](https://www.economist.com/china/2022/06/02/chinas-interest-in-the-pacific-islands-is-growing) there over the past decade; America mostly snoozed. It received a rude awakening in 2022 when China reached a security agreement with the Solomon Islands, and has been playing catch-up since.

Mr Blinken duly signed a defence pact with the prime minister of PNG, James Marape. The deal will make it easier for the countries’ forces to train together, and America said that it will help to beef up PNG’s disaster relief and humanitarian responses. Many Pacific islanders, however, are not enamoured with the plan: they fear militarisation and dislike their region being an arena for competing superpowers. 

## Britain and Switzerland talk trade

A first round of talks is beginning in London on Monday on another post-Brexit free-trade agreement, between Britain and Switzerland. The existing set-up, signed in 2019, replicates the latter’s piecemeal arrangements with the EU. Later deals added some flexibility for working between the two countries and provided mutual standards for some goods. 

Switzerland is Britain’s fourth-biggest market, after the EU, America and China. Last year it was the recipient of £33bn-worth ($41bn), or 4.1%, of British goods and services. That is three times more than Australia, with which Britain struck a much-ballyhooed free-trade deal in 2021. After that comes into force this month it is forecast to add just 0.08% a year to GDP by 2035.

Most goods already pass between Britain and Switzerland without tariffs. Prospective gains therefore will mainly be found in [services](https://www.economist.com/britain/2023/05/09/britains-services-exports-are-booming-despite-brexit-why)—especially finance, which is a speciality of both countries. Between haggling sessions, the Britons might also seek advice on battles with the EU, in which the Swiss have much experience.

## Tim Scott’s long-shot presidential bid

On Monday Tim Scott, a Republican senator from South Carolina, is expected to [formally launch his campaign](https://www.economist.com/united-states/2023/04/13/why-tim-scott-is-such-a-long-shot-for-the-republican-nomination) for America’s presidency. Hardly anyone in the party has a bad word to say about Mr Scott, who grew up in poverty with a single mother to become the first African-American senator to represent a Southern state since 1881. 

Mr Scott is no belligerent ideologue. His congressional record highlights his championing of “opportunity zones”—a tax-incentive scheme to revitalise deprived neighbourhoods—and for a bipartisan effort at police reform that eventually foundered.

Yet his willingness to work across the aisle may end up working against him. Modern Republican voters expect a culture warrior, and polling suggests just 2% support Mr Scott. He clearly feels that playing the part will help his chances, however. In a recent video he warned that empowering the “radical left” would trap families in “failing schools” and “crime-ridden neighbourhoods”. Some think he could ride the role into a vice-presidential position.

## Hwang Ji-hae lets nature take its course

Hwang Ji-hae’s last submission, in 2012, to the Royal Horticultural Society Chelsea Flower Show—the gardening world’s equivalent to Wimbledon, held in London each year—was inspired by the demilitarised zone that separates North and South Korea. The landscape artist’s garden reproduced the scars left behind by the Korean war almost 60 years before, and the wildlife that has since grown over it like stitches. It won the President’s Award, one of Chelsea’s most coveted prizes. 

Ms Hwang will further explore the restorative power of nature in this year’s show, which opens to the press on Monday and the public the following day. Her entry is based on the rocky outcrops of Jirisan, the highest mountain on the South Korean mainland, and its medicinal herbs, many of which are now endangered. Ms Hwang hopes that, in contemplating the plants that saved human lives before modern medicine, visitors will better understand humans’ place in the natural world, and the ways in which each can heal the other. 

## Daily quiz

Our baristas will serve you a new question each day this week. On Friday your challenge is to give us all five answers and, as important, tell us the connecting theme. Email your responses (and include mention of your home city and country) by 1700 GMT on Friday to [<span class="__cf_email__" data-cfemail="6e3f1b07142b1d1e1c0b1d1d012e0b0d01000103071d1a400d0103">[email&#160;protected]</span>](https://mail.google.com/mail/?view=cm&amp;fs=1&amp;tf=1&amp;to=QuizEspresso@economist.com). We’ll pick randomly from those with the right answers and crown three winners on Saturday.

<strong>Monday: </strong>Which car company, established in 1899, sells models including the Megane and Clio?

----------
